# A Nextflow pipeline for generating codon alignments from protein alignments.

OrthoFinder and many other tools are based on protein-level alignments, but many tests of natural selection (e.g., HyPhy,PAML) rely on codon-level alignments.
This Nextflow pipeline is intended to generate the necessary codon-level alignments.

Users must provide paths to two directories: 
 -(1) A path to a directory containing FASTA files with protein sequences, e.g., those found in the `Orthogroup_Sequences` directory produced by Orthofinder.
 -(2) A path to a directory containing FASTA files with coding DNA sequences (CDS). Currently, these will need to be generated by the user. The file name and the sequence ids need to mirror the files in the protein sequence directory.


Currently tested software dependencies.

| Software      	| version     |
|---------------	|-------------|
| Nextflow	     	| 25.10.2     |
| python       	  | 3.13.2      |
| mafft           | 7.562      	|
| trimAl          | 1.5.rev1    |
| clipKit         | 2.12.0      |
| pal2nal         | 14.0.0      |

To obtain a list of command line options.

```{r}
nextflow run main.nf --help
```

You can do an example run with default settings.

```
nextflow run -c test.config main.nf
```

To run with Clipkit.

```
nextflow run -c test.config main.nf --trimmed_cds_alignment_dir=test_data/clipkit_trimmed_cds_align --trim_tool=clipkit --trim_options=""
```

To run without trimming.

```
nextflow run -c test.config main.nf --trim_alignment=false
```

## The `work` directory

When you run Nextflow, it will automatically create a directory called `work`. 
This will create a large number of files, including bash scripts with the command used for the run.
Because of this, the default of Nextflow is to create symbolic link for the outputs that point to the file in the `work` directory.
I have made the default for this pipeline to instead copy the files (i.e., `mode='copy'`), but this means the pipeline will generate twice as many files (one in `work`, one specified in the output directory).
The `work` directory is not cleared with every unique Nextflow run.
This can lead to a large number of files sitting in the `work` directory that are not needed.
You should clear out this directory as needed. 

## YAML files

Instead of specifying run parameters on the command line, users can also provide a YAML file.
If you have a `params.yaml` file that has the following contents,

```
cds_dir=~/my_cds_files
pep_dir=~/my_pep_files
trim_tool="clipkit"
```

then you can pass these arguments to Nextflow by specifying the `-params-file` argument on the command line.

```
nextflow run -c test.config -params-file params.yaml main.nf
```

## Configuring Nextflow submission

When working with Nextflow on a shared computational resource, it is advisable to configure the frequency with which processes are run in order to ensure the user is not taking up too many resources.
This repository contains an example Nextflow configuration file `test.config`.

```
executor {
	$slurm {
        submitRateLimit = '500/10min'
    }
  $local {
     queueSize = 20
  }
}

process {
  withLabel:process_hpc {
    executor='slurm'
  	cpus = 1
	  clusterOptions = "--account=rokaslab"
	  time =  10.m
	  memory = 4.GB
	  array = 10 
  }
  withLabel:process_local {
      executor = 'local'
      cpus = 1
      memory = '0.25GB'
   }
}
```

The `executor` specifies parameters for the different ways in which the process is executed. `local` means the processes will run using the local nodes/CPUs, whereas `slurm` means the processes will be submitted as SLURM jobs.
The current pipeline treats the alignment processes (the more computationally task) as SLURM processes, where as trimming and back translating proteins are run in the local environment.
On a SLURM system, the Nextflow process should still be run using an`sbatch` command so that the `local` processes are run on a compute node.
Nextflow supports job array type submissions (the `array` value in `process:withLabel:process_hpc`), which is easier on the SLURM submission system. 
You can also specify the amount of memmory and the number of CPUs available to each process.
Please see the Nextflow documentation (https://docs.seqera.io/nextflow/config and https://docs.seqera.io/nextflow/executor) for more details.

